---
layout: post
title: Maduro - Ben Kenney
date: 2012-12-07
---


Maduro - Ben Kenney
===================

I used to be pretty into Incubus. Granted, they do have some pretty cool
albums (my review of S.C.I.E.N.C.E. here: 
[](http://clarkkampfe.tumblr.com/post/33962896745/s-c-i-e-n-c-e-incubus)[http://clarkkampfe.tumblr.com/post/33962896745/s-c-i-e-n-c-e-incubus](http://clarkkampfe.tumblr.com/post/33962896745/s-c-i-e-n-c-e-incubus)).
Really, I loved them.

 But there is not an Incubus album that matches that of either of Ben
Kenney’s greats.

A little background about Ben Kenney: he’s one of those dudes who can
play everything. Guitar for The Roots. Bass for Incubus. Played with
Erykah Badu, Timberlake, and Blackalicious, plus his other projects Time
Lapse Consortium and Supergrub. He just does stuff. Under his own name,
he plays…everything. Guitar, drums, bass, piano, vocals, everything. And
what’s more: it’s all fucking awesome. I would kill to be able to play
one instrument as well as he plays ALL OF THEM.

Maduro is one of those albums that is simply without fluff. There just
isn’t any padding, you know? It’s “all killer, no filler” as Sum 41
would say. 

I still remember the first time I heard the opener, “Wrong”. Calvin’s
car, Q Street, Omaha, Nebraska, USA. I remember thinking “damn.” That’s
all there was to it. Some albums you have to eat the whole thing and let
it digest for a while. Maybe go back a few years later and have a look.
That was definitely not the case here: I was hooked from the first bars.


This album rocks. A lot of the time it’s straight-ahead
verse-chorus-verse-bridge-chorus type stuff, but then he’ll do something
crazy like throw in 5-part backing vocals (with only his own voice—
wtf?) and snare hits only on beat 2. Who fucking hits snares only on 2?

Anyway, I’ll shut up with this crap review. Go listen to some rock ‘n’
roll.

Sounds like: rugged individualism.

Start at 1:00 

View the original
[list](http://clarkkampfe.tumblr.com/post/33904700007/album-love) in a
new window.
