---
layout: post
title: After All - Percy Hill
date: 2012-10-21
---

“Autumn still comes and brings me to tears again and again,” goes the
line on “Lap of Luxury”, a back-half standout on Percy Hill’s “After
All”. 

This album is special to me. “Tears again and again” special.

My buddy Calvin showed me Percy Hill sometime between 2006 and 2008 on a
show choir trip, I think it was. Calvin has introduced me more good
music than I can remember (Jamiroquai, BT, Me’Shell NdegéOcello among
many others [super special crushingly funky bonus track:
[](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yxnsl4E8ea4 "The Womb/The Way")[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yxnsl4E8ea4](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yxnsl4E8ea4)])
but I’m particularly indebted to him for Percy Hill. This album has had
staying power for me in a way that few albums do. 

I can listen to this album straight through, no skips, multiple times on
end. That’s no exaggeration. This one is a “desert island” album of
mine. It lives with albums in my top 10 from Radiohead, M83, Mew, Ben
Kenney and The Dear Hunter (look at the list to guess which ones :-)).

Percy Hill has been compared favorably to Steely Dan, and I think the
comparison is apt. They both age well, they’re both like totes chill
brah, and they are both as tight as…well, you get the idea. After All is
like a smoother, jazzier Umphrey’s McGee. Where Umphrey’s rocks (In The
Kitchen, etc) Percy Hill just floats.

What always gets me about both Percy Hill albums is their genuineness.
“After All” and “Color In Bloom” have a feeling of real empathy within
their playfulness. Percy Hill didn’t play to get cheap bar band
chuckles. They played to make people happy, and that’s as admirable a
goal in life as any.

Sounds like: Love.


View the original
[list](http://clarkkampfe.tumblr.com/post/33904700007/album-love) in a
new window.

P.S. I tired telling a girl about this band once. She thought I said
“Pussy Hill". That was a fun conversation.

