---
layout: post
title: Dynamite - Jamiroquai
date: 2012-11-23
---



I’ll get the bad shit out of the way: I hate the title track of this
album. It sucks. I’m not sure how that happened, but it did, and I’m not
happy about it. Moving on.

Ladies and gentlemen, take your seats, and prepare to bliss out on some
neo-70s string pads, move-your-ass bass, and Stevie Wonder-style
wizardry. With some thrift-store leisure suits and the right chemical
encouragement, you and your buddies could make a night out of this
thing.

Jamiroquai’s dynamite “Dynamite” dovetails nicely with my previous job:
Marc Broussard’s brilliant “Carencro”. Just like Broussard’s, it’s
funky, it’s thick, and it gets the job done. Let me say that again:
THICK. 

Present in the background of this whole thing are bass lines that are so
cool they were probably cooling their heels with Joe Biden in Mexico
last winter (thank you, Onion). Basslines like that tend to attract the
wrong kind of attention, ya ken?

My picks on this bad boy are “Black Devil Car” (the rockiest and
cowbelliest track here), Starchild (keyboards and string runs all
night), and “Seven Days In Sunny June”. That shit just floats. “Feels
Just Like It Should” is another one of those “how did they make such a
fucking great opening track” moments. It’s really that great. There’s a
crazy disco vibe on “Electric Mistress”, too. Calvin loved “Time Won’t
Wait”, so I’ll throw that one down here as well. Does anyone doubt how
deeply Calvin shaped my musical taste? 

Jamiroquai - at least this album - is like some weird Steely Dan meets
Michael Jackson shit. Like I said before, THICK, but it feels decidedly
studio. I’ve seen a pretty decent amount of live music, and I’m not sure
how well Dynamite would sound live. Not that it really matters: the
amount of energy on this studio album put most live shows to shame.
Listen to the sample track. If you don’t like it, you’re probably [this
guy](http://weknowmemes.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/i-had-fun-once-meme.jpg "FUN").

Sounds like: that one time you danced so funky you ended up wearing her
pants.

 View the original
[list](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/pub?key=0ArDppihwaWa6dFdaeV9pOXNTeERqbWVFTFp5bWFuNmc&output=htm    l) in a
new window.

