---
layout: post
title: Emergency & I - The Dismemberment Plan
date: 2012-10-27
---


Well slap me with a trout this is a great album. I’m not the first to
say it, and I won’t be the last: Emergency & I is fucking phenomenal. 

This album is on the same team as those from Neutral Milk Hotel, Fugazi,
Guided By Voices, et al. (I should have a job at Pitchfork for
mentioning them in the same paragraph) When you bring up those bands in
2012, people love to punch you in your stupid “I love fixed gear
bicycles” face. Don’t let that put you off: these bands are fucking
great. So is this album.

I was nine years old when this album came out. I’m sure I was perfecting
the balancing act that is playing Starcraft Brood War on a dialup
connection at that time. (Now that I think about it, I’ll be sure to add
that to my resumé) Skipping ahead a few years and first kisses, sometime
in highschool, I found that glistening moist miracle that was (Oink's Pink Palace)[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oink’s\_Pink\_Palace]
and began a long rabbit-hole of a journey. The Dismemberment Plan’s
“Emergency & I” was one of those albums I found pretty early on, and it
changed my life.

This album hits you front and center with disillusionment. When you’re
in highschool and an idiot, it’s tough to find things that share your
disillusionment in a fulfilling, empathetic way. Especially things that
don’t sound whiney and cliched. No one wants to spend their adolescence
whining along with Evanescense or Green Day lyrics: we fall into those
traps because we can’t find anything better. 

“Emergency & I” is like musical Camus. You’re on a street corner, you’re
in class, you’re with friends, your girlfriend, whatever, and you get
this feeling of unease. This isn’t what your life should be. On standout
“The City”, Travis Morrison lets us have it: ‘So I’m not unsympathetic /
I see why you left / There’s no one to know / There’s nothing to do /
The city’s been dead / since you’ve been gone’. If you didn’t feel that
way in high school, you were probably an asshole. 

As my disillusionment and disaffection have grown and morphed with age,
I’ve found that my appreciation for this album has as well. It still
soothes in a particular, kindred-spirit way. We’re an empathetic
species: we’ll take our catharsis with a side of community, thank you.
I’ve no shame in admitting that I’ve seen relief from experiencing
someone else’s time-shifted twenty-something alienation myself. Life is
alienation.

Sounds like: growing up.

View the
original [list](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/pub?key=0ArDppihwaWa6dFdaeV9pOXNTeERqbWVFTFp5bWFuNmc&output=html)
in a new window.
