---
layout: post
title: By The Throat - Eyedea and Abilities
date: 2012-11-07
---



This album shouldn’t work. I imagine most people probably had a chuckle
when it dropped. In 2009, it was tough to even talk about rap-rock
ironically without getting dirty looks. 

That said, anybody who goes to talk shit and then listens to this record
will be in for a surprise. This record will be immediately familiar to
you if you’ve heard P.O.S.’s Audition. It’s got that razor-edge attack,
super-fast rappy pappy, but this time there’s singing. Yep. That’s
right. By The Throat is one surprisingly melodic hip-hop disc. 

People probably remember this one for the standout “Smile”, but it’s
full of gold elsewhere. My favorites are “This Story” and “Time Flies
When You Have A Gun”. 

Eyedea chats about the psycho-emotional effects of owning a gun (“You
can own it but mostly it’ll own you”), living at the mercy of your
neurons (“All I can do is breathe, that’s how I put out the fire”), and
that feeling we all know and love: self doubt (“My worst habit is waking
up at least once a day”). 

It’s sad that he’s dead. It really is. But the real crime is that a dude
this brilliant went before his time. I mean that very sincerely. Anybody
who has ever had a psychiatric/neural disorder can relate to the way he
talks about it all. Your brain chemistry is this system, built on
millions of years of evolution, that we barely understand. We throw
drugs at it, we exercise, we try therapy, but we’re at the tip of the
tip of the iceberg in terms of understanding it all. It takes a keen
emotional intelligence to explore that gulf of ignorance in an elegant
way. 

Beyond enjoying this record for its musical merit, I appreciate it as
the statement of a fellow tortured human. Eyedea was a guy, like you and
I, just trying to make sense of this fucked up little experiment. He
took one hell of a crack at it. For that, I am grateful.

View the
original [list](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/pub?key=0ArDppihwaWa6dFdaeV9pOXNTeERqbWVFTFp5bWFuNmc&output=html)
in a new window.

