---
layout: post
title: Year Zero - Nine Inch Nails
date: 2013-06-10
---


Well, given what’s happened recently with most things I care about the
most (privacy rights, netrights, free speech, whistleblowing, exposure
of the massive security state apparatus, etc.), I felt it right to
dedicate a review to Edward Snowden.

Nine Inch Nails’ “Year Zero” is a landmark for me. You’re driving along,
and there are pebbles on the pavement that get kicked up by semi-trucks.
Those are little albums. Maybe MGMT, one of Muse’s later offerings, or
one of the recent spate of mediocre not-quite-underground-rap albums
(A\$AP Rocky et al.).

There are rocks on the side of the road, and you think “shit, that’s a
pretty big rock.” Coheed and Cambria’s “3”. Interpol’s “Turn on the
Bright Lights”. Ratatat’s self-titled. Big old rocks. (We’re either
driving through southwestern Wisconsin or southeastern Wyoming; you
pick)

The rocks are big, and you’re driving along, and shit, look at that
goddamn prairie monolith on the horizon.

That’s this album.

Year Zero is a concept album, and it’s a successful one. It tells the
story of a country in the midst of a hysterical tyrannical
disembowelment. Really, it’s not so far off from the early days of the
Arab Spring: people getting ripped out of their houses in the middle of
the night; protesters kettled and taken off on anonymous vans never to
be seen again; and a general climate of control through fear.

Only, it’s future America. Imagine the unpredictability and North Korean
aspects Orwell’s 1984, the terror of Tiananmen uprisings, and the
techno-activism of the Middle East, and now apply them to a
hyper-religious, fascistic United States.

From what I understand, Reznor wrote the album in response his feelings
toward the Bush administration’s increasingly authoritarian and
religious direction.

Many of the songs are in first person, telling the story of the raids,
the terror, the moral uncertainty rebels face when contemplating violent
activism against a faceless machine-like theocracy. The beat production
is pretty harsh for those uninitiated into music harder than Passion
Pit, with lots of fun-house guitar whining, gristly buzz saw synth, and
a sparse, creepy detuned character making you think you’re in some
horror movie.

Are we in Trent Reznor’s “Year Zero”? No. There isn’t armed insurrection
in the streets here. But I would qualify my answer with “have you been
following the news lately?”

The reason people have and always will make art about this sort of thing
is because we can’t seem to eradicate our species’ fascistic,
controlling tendencies. There is something in our nature that yearns to
be the slave, that yearns for security, just as there is something that
yearns to control and to terrify.

But there is also something within us not satisfied to be the cruel
masters or the chattel, but to be the helmsmen of our own ships and the
tellers of our own stories.

This is why we record albums, write novels, spray graffiti, and defend
our founding charters by leaking the ill-kept secrets of tired pedants
and corrupt suits.

Sounds like: [So Long As Men Die, Liberty Will Never
Perish](%E2%80%9Dhttps://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WibmcsEGLKo%E2%80%9D)

View the original
[list](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/pub?key=0ArDppihwaWa6dFdaeV9pOXNTeERqbWVFTFp5bWFuNmc&output=htm    l) in a
new window.

