---
layout: post
title: Still Here
date: 2013-07-18
---

I’ve been plodding a long over here in middle America. I’m in this weird
purgatory, but the light seems to be growing less faint. Since getting
back from Tunisia, I’ve started efforts to clarify things.

I headed out to Denver and stayed with my brother - my guru - for a few
weeks, and that helped me focus on the fact that yes, I do want to work
with computers. This life-long hobby/fascination/obsession is more than
that; it’s my way. There is a reason why I keep coming back to
tinkering, breaking, and hacking together.

With my brother’s help I applied to a few developer bootcamps, and I was
fortunate enough to be accepted to most of them. I’ll be starting at one
this fall, and I couldn’t be more excited. I’ll be topping-up my
HTML/CSS, digging into Ruby, Rails, Git, and project management with
zeal. As someone who has a strong emotional attachment to both the
internet itself — it providing me with a solid environment to learn to
argue, code, write, read, comprehend, and discover the joys of falling
down the rabbit hole — and with the idea of the internet as means of
human unification and collision, it is a daily ache that I do not speak
its languages with the fullest of fluency. This is my attempt to rectify
that illiteracy.

And with the whole NSA thing blowing up as everyone who has been paying
attention the last few years expected it to, I feel particularly lucky
to be wading into the fray armed with 4 solid years of studying
political science. When I tell people I studied government, community
ethics, philosophy and Middle East politics, people usually say, “uh,
cool…but what are you going to do with that?" I used to not have a
strong answer for that question, but now, anyone who has watched the
news for more than 5 minutes in the last month instinctively knows that
the combination of sociopolitcal understanding and technological
know-how is a skillset that will only get more valuable with the passage
of time. Just read [Gabriella Coleman’s \`Coding
Freedom’](http://codingfreedom.com/) if you don’t believe me.

I’d be lying if I said it was all positive feelings, though. I’m
certainly nervous. I’m afraid that my anxiety (all-but-disappeared as of
late) will make its grand return. I’m nervous that the course will not
be as in depth as I’m hoping, it being \>=9 weeks and all. My daily
study and drive to understand not only the technologies of the web but
also the current state of affairs - i.e., the NSA, Free Software, the
arguments over Ubuntu display servers - leaves me with a lingering fear
that I will burn out before reaching the front door. I’m afraid that the
vibe will be more “startups, bro" than “what are the best use of
precious brain cycles?" I’m scared that I’ll hate web dev. I’m fucking
terrified [of having my sincerity mistaken for
pretense](http://www.brainpickings.org/index.php/2012/12/19/anais-nin-leo-lerman/).

I’ve learned so much over the past 12 months, though, that I can’t help
but turn back towards optimism. I’ve survived my time living abroad,
with stories and pictures and published work to tell the tale. I’ve
learned bits of JavaScript and jQuery, had interviews with some great
hackers out in SF, solved problems over at [Project
Euler](http://projecteuler.net/) (and I’m a guy who HATED math up until
about 4 months ago), I’ve written some Ruby and Python, learned all
about setting up my own file server and VPN, and went from
zero-to-functional on the command line (I mean, 4 months ago I didn’t
even know what vim was and guess what I write/code with now…). Next up
is to throw together a VPS and see what [Jekyll](http://jekyllrb.com/)
is all about (inspiration
[here](https://medium.com/surveillance-state/19a5db211e47)).

But you get the idea. Speak, Samuel Johnson:

``

"All the performances of human art, at which we look with praise or
wonder, are instances of the resistless force of perseverance: it is by
this that the quarry becomes a pyramid, and that distant countries are
united with canals. If a man was to compare the effect of a single
stroke of the pick-axe, or of one impression of the spade, with the
general design and last result, he would be overwhelmed by the sense of
their disproportion; yet those petty operations, incessantly continued,
in time surmount the greatest difficulties, and mountains are levelled,
and oceans bounded, by the slender force of human beings.

It is therefore of the utmost importance that those, who have any
intention of deviating from the beaten roads of life, and acquiring a
reputation superior to names hourly swept away by time among the refuse
of fame, should add to their reason, and their spirit, the power of
persisting in their purposes; acquire the art of sapping what they
cannot batter, and the habit of vanquishing obstinate resistance by
obstinate attacks."

