---
layout: post
title: Tragic Kingdom - No Doubt
date: 2013-02-13
---

If you didn’t fall in love with Age of Empires II at one point, you are
a chump. There, I said it.

“Choppa”. (I preferred the Britons)

How the hell does No Doubt’s 1995 “Tragic Kingdom” relate to Age of
Empires II, you ask?

It’s simple. When playing a cracked, disk-image version of AoEII on my
parents old Windows ME (yes, I know) machine, the game would still spin
up whatever disc happened to be in the CD-ROM drive at the time. In a
true testament to childhood laziness, “Tragic Kingdom” was that disc for
a good number of weeks or months.

I heard “Excuse Me Mr.” blast into its first bars thousands of times.

An interesting tidbit: my brother and I both played songs from this
album at our high school’s Winter Formal half-time show Battle of the
Bands. His band played “Different People” and mine played “Sunday
Morning”. I think his performance was better.

This album has gone on to be a classic for just about everyone who ever
heard it, and it’s easy to see why. This was Gwen at her best. This was
third-wave ska, if not at its finest, at least in its most pure,
idiomatic form. Other names from this time period pleasantly spring to
mind: [Goldfinger](http://bit.ly/WYvbuP).
[Fishbone](http://bit.ly/X13jTu). [Sublime](http://bit.ly/XA1Gxk). [The
Mighty Mighty Bosstones](http://bit.ly/WYtSvV). [The Dance Hall
Crashers](http://bit.ly/14MpwtS). [Reel Big
Fish](http://bit.ly/12EOlcU). [Less Than Jake](http://bit.ly/154ylQV).

All things considered, not a bad bug for a cracked copy of a game, I’d
say.

Sounds like: 90s.

View the original
[list](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/pub?key=0ArDppihwaWa6dFdaeV9pOXNTeERqbWVFTFp5bWFuNmc&output=html) in a
new window.
