---
layout: post
title: Silent Alarm - Bloc Party
created: 2012-12-28
---


I like to multitask in the shower. It’s my principle thinking space. The
combination of heat and white noise, together with the lack of anything
resembling a device capable of sending or receiving Tweets usually
results in a high “fuck that’s a great a idea!”-to-shower ratio. 

I also like listening to music in the shower. This started in middle
school, which is about when I started caring what music I listened to. I
first heard Bloc Party at the recommendation of my pal Ian, who
maintained that it was “the best makeout music” he knew. I never put
that to the test (that I can remember—who knows, maybe I did) but I did
find that it stayed in my shower CD player for longer than just about
any other album save Reel Big Fish’s Cheer Up!

Most people know Bloc Party by now. A Weekend In The City is fantastic,
Intimacy isn’t bad, and Four isn’t that bad either. They’ve been making
music since 2004, and though I hate to say this about any band, their
debut Silent Alarm, is by far their best work.

Silent Alarm works because it sounds like Radiohead’s The Bends meets
Hard-Fi, with a dash of dancepop thrown in to make sure people shake it.
To say the least, Silent Alarm isn’t tough going. 

The drums steal the show. They’re tight, fiercely driving, and I would
even say tribal in spots. Kele, now known to a wider audience through
his collaboration with Martin Solveig
([http://youtu.be/orc9nAiEG\_8](http://youtu.be/orc9nAiEG_8)), is
brilliant.

Highlights include the raucous opener “Like Eating Glass” and “The
Pioneers”. “Helicopter” is eminently listenable, but picking standouts
on this disc is senseless. It’s a winner fore and aft. Especially if you
listen to it in the shower.

Sounds like: a supposedly good makeout soundtrack?



View the original
[list](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/pub?key=0ArDppihwaWa6dFdaeV9pOXNTeERqbWVFTFp5bWFuNmc&output=html) in a new window
