---
layout: post
title: Evil Empire - Rage Against the Machine
created: 2012-12-11
---

This album is something of a paradox. It’s an album that talks about
themes like capitalist exploitation, the Zapatistas, and bourgeois
American racism, while at the same time blowing up and going hugely
commercial. We’re talking about an album that came out in 1996 (I was in
kindergarten) and was certified triple platinum by the year 2000.

Rage Against the Machine represented that parenthetical,
always-alluded-to-but-never seldom named brown-skinned devil that white
America was so obsessed with circa George Bush the Elder. Which is
really confusing, because it’s a band that was more concerned with
globalisation and capitalism than it was anything else.

(Yes, I am writing this in Google Docs on an Apple Computer and I do get
the irony)

My relationship with this album isn’t especially complicated. In fact,
it’s the relationship I imagine most people had with this album. Young,
quasi-rebellious (or at least thinking so) looking for something that
isn’t puppies and white picket fences. The difference between something
like Rage and most of the other bullshit out there that calls itself
rebellious (P.O.D., Staind, Evanescense, etc.) is that you can listen to
Rage Against the Machine and not have to take a shower afterword to wash
off the 13-year-old suburban white girl lyrics. We’re talking about a
band here that felt it necessary to put “no samples, keyboards or
synthesizers used in the making of this record" in its liner notes.

They also put on a fair lesson in anti-colonialism in “People of the
Sun” and threw out the lyrics “Yeah I’m rollin’ down Rodeo wit a shotgun
// These people ain’t seen a brown skin man // Since their grandparents
bought one” in “Down Rodeo”. Rodeo, of course, refers to the ritzy Rodeo
Drive in Beverly Hills. Other album mentions and themes include Fred
Hampton (Black Panther Party), Jackie Onassis, Gaza, Tiananmen Square,
religion as a tool of propaganda, and the dehumanizing effect of
capitalism on workers, among others.

Clearly, Rage Against the Machine didn’t want to be put in the same boat
as New Kids On The Block and Marky Mark. “A little to the left…” as Bill
Hicks would have said.

Sounds like: Cairo streets, right about now.




View the original
[list](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/pub?key=0ArDppihwaWa6dFdaeV9pOXNTeERqbWVFTFp5bWFuNmc&output=html) in a
new window.

